SAML and Account linking (#840)
clerk/clerk-docs: docs/authentication/saml/account-linking.mdx

---
title: Account Linking
description: Learn how Clerk handles account linking during SAML SSO.
---

# Account Linking

> Account Linking is a process used by Clerk to ensure a smooth sign-in and sign-up experience using both SAML SSO and other methods (e.g. username/password). By using the "email address" as the common identifier, Clerk aims to merge accounts whenever possible. This mechanism is triggered when an SAML provider returns an email address that matches an existing account, assuming a single owner for each email address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Account Linking is a process that Clerk uses to ensure a smooth sign-in and sign-up experience using SAML SSO and other methods (e.g. username/password). By using the email address as the common identifier, Clerk automatically attempts to link accounts whenever possible. Account linking triggers when a SAML provider returns an email address that matches an existing account, assuming a single owner for each email address.
```

Really good intro! Just some cleanup edits here. I added the word "automatically". Is that technically accurate? I thought it would make it more explicit that Clerk is coded to do this, rather than any people managing it

## How it works

> When a user attempts to sign in or sign up, Clerk first checks the email address provided. Clerk will attempt to link the SAML account with any existing Clerk account that shares the same email address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user attempts to sign in or sign up, Clerk first checks the provided email address. Clerk will attempt to link the SAML account with any existing Clerk account that shares the same email address.
```

Is this scoped within Clerk apps, or is this referring to Clerk accounts?

To clarify, which of these is the case?
A. Clerk is going to merge _my_ account as a developer if I sign in with SSO to Clerk.com?
B. Clerk is going to merge my _users'_ accounts if they sign into my Clerk app with SSO?

In the following sections, we'll look at the different scenarios that can occur during this process and explain how Clerk handles each one.

<Callout type="info">

>     Email addresses from SAML providers are considered verified by default!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Email addresses from SAML providers are considered verified by default.
```

Lovely note ❤️ Let's avoid exclamation points though (I know they exist elsewhere in the docs, but I'd like to get rid of them over time)

</Callout>

<Images
    width={2400}
    height={1754}
    src="/docs/images/authentication/account-linking-flow-saml.webp"

>     alt="Flow chart of the SAML SSO account linking process in various scenarios"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    alt="Flow chart of the SAML SSO account linking process in various scenarios."
```

/>

> ### Email address is verified in Clerk

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Email is verified in Clerk
```

I think we can drop "address". Doing so will make the other headings shorter so they take up less space in the ToC

> In this scenario, when a user signs in using a SAML provider that returns a matching verified email address, Clerk links the SAML account to the existing account and signs the user in. This even applies to password-protected accounts, as the SAML sign-in process automatically bypasses password verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user signs into your app using a SAML provider that returns a matching verified email address, Clerk links the SAML account to the existing account and signs the user in. This even applies to password-protected accounts, as the SAML sign-in process automatically bypasses password verification.
```
Based on this paragraph I assume we're talking about users within a developer's app, so I'll add edits to clarify that more explicilty

> ### Email address is not verified in Clerk but instance doesn't require verification during Sign-up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Email is unverified and verification isn't required
```

Trying to shorten this up, as it looks big in the ToC
![image](https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/assets/5156915/4e91f796-ab1c-4736-a1a8-3ce54411dae1)

For instances that allow account creation without email verification at sign-up, there is a possibility that an account may be created using an unverified email address.

To allow unverified email addresses for your instance, navigate to the [Email, Phone, Username](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=user-authentication/email-phone-username) page in the Clerk Dashboard. Click on the settings cog icon next to "Email address" and uncheck the "Verify at sign-up" toggle.

<Images
  width={2500}
  height={2000}
  src="/docs/images/authentication/account-linking-verify-at-sign-up.webp"
  alt="Verify at sign-up toggle in the Clerk Dashboard"
/>

In this scenario, when a user signs in using a SAML provider, Clerk links the SAML account to the existing account by also verifying the existing email address and signs the user in. This even applies to password-protected accounts, as the SAML sign-in process automatically bypasses password verification.

> ### Email address is not verified in Clerk

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Email is unverified
```

> In this scenario, when a user signs in using a SAML provider that returns a matching unverified email address, Clerk doesn't link the SAML account to the existing account, but instead signs the user up and creates a completely new account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user signs into your app using a SAML provider that returns a matching unverified email address, Clerk doesn't link the SAML account to the existing account, but instead signs the user up and creates a completely new account.
```

> In this scenario, when a user signs in using a SAML provider that returns a matching unverified email address, Clerk doesn't link the SAML account to the existing account, but instead signs the user up and creates a completely new account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user signs in using a SAML provider that returns a matching unverified email address, Clerk doesn't link the SAML account to the existing account, but instead signs the user up and creates a completely new account.
```
